Feat/user flow: Diagrams and post on user flow in Sprout (#27)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/design/user-flow.qmd

---
title: User Flow
---

{{< include ../_wip.qmd >}}

> This document describes the user flow of Sprout. The user flow is split into five diagrams that go through the flow in more detail. At the end of the post, you can see the user flow of Sprout in its entirety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes the user flow of Sprout. The user flow is split into five diagrams that go through the flow in more detail. At the end of the document, you can see the user flow of Sprout in its entirety.
```

A schema includes:

- table names, 
- column names (*headers*), 
- descriptions (a sentence describe what the column contains), 
- data types, 
- whether the columns can contain NULL values, and 
- an optional reader-friendly title. 

Together, we call these the *schema definitions*, or simply *definitions*. In the table below, you can see an example of a schema named `data_resource` for a data resource that contains one table `table_1` with user information.

|schema |table | column-name | description | data-type | is-nullable | title (optional)
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `data_resource` | `table_1` | `user_id` | Unique ID identifying the user | `int` | 0 | NULL |
| `data_resource` | `table_1` | `last_name` | User's last name | `varchar` | 0 | NULL |
| `data_resource` | `table_1` | `first_name` | User's first name | `varchar` | 0 | NULL |
| `data_resource` | `table_1` | `email` | Unique ID identifying the user | `int` | 0 | NULL |
| `data_resource` | `table_1` | `address` | first address line of user's address | `varchar` | 1 | address line 1 |

> : Example of schema named `data resource` with one table `table_1` with user information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Example of schema named `data resource` with one table `table_1` with user information.
```

Users with the role [Data Management Administrators](users.qmd#data-management-administrators) are responsible for setting up these initial structures of the database. 

In Sprout, there are three ways to create schemas: 

- Create Schema from file
- Create Schema from Existing Schema
- Create Schema Manually

> ![](images/user-flow-schema-creation.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram of the flow that occurs when a new schema is created.](images/user-flow-schema-creation.png)
```

If the [Data Management Administrator](users.qmd#data-management-administrators) decides that the schema is not correct, they will click "Edit Schema", and they will be shown a user interface with the schema where they can edit the headers, definitions, and add new fields if needed.

When the [Data Management Administrator](users.qmd#data-management-administrators) is satisfied with their adaptions, they click "Save and Submit Schema". The schema will then go through the validation check, "Schema Completeness" again and if the validation is successful, Sprout will confirm: "New Schema Added Successfully".

<!--TODO This description and the user flow diagram is not entirely identical. It needs further work. -->

### Continue to Data Upload or Quit?

Now, that the schema has been created successfully, the [Data Management Administrator](users.qmd#data-management-administrators) has two options: Either they can "Continue to Data Upload", if they want to add data to the newly created schema right after the schema has been submitted, or they can choose to quit Sprout at this step, if they only wanted to create the schema as preparation for future uploads.

> ![](images/user-flow-schema-created-continue-to-upload.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram describing the next steps given after creating the schema and passing the validation steps.](images/user-flow-schema-created-continue-to-upload.png)
```

## Data Upload

There are two entry points for a user to upload data using an existing schema. The first option is to continue from the diagram above, where the [Data Management Administrator](users.qmd#data-management-administrators) will upload data right after they have created a new schema. In this option, they click "Continue to Data Upload" (left path of diagram below).

> ![](images/user-flow-prepare-to-upload-using-existing-schema.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing the steps taken for uploading data when using an existing schema.](images/user-flow-prepare-to-upload-using-existing-schema.png)
```

After these steps, Sprout will initialise the data upload. This initialisation includes a validation check, *Schema and Data Match*, as seen in the diagram below. At this step, Sprout checks whether the data and schema match. If this validation fails, Sprout will show "Validation Failed" along with error messages where the system detects that the data does not match the schema. 

The aim here is to show the user error messages that are as meaningful and helpful as possible. These messages should enable the user to go to their raw data and edit them to attempt to fix the errors. This step is, naturally, outside of Sprout (therefore, marked in blue in the diagram below). The user will then click "Upload Edited/New Version of File" and Sprout will show a user interface, where the user can add the new version of the file. When the user has selected the file and clicks "Upload File", the validation check runs again. 

If the validation fails, the loop with showing errors, user editing file outside of Sprout and uploading it again, will happen again. 

If validation succeeds, the data will be uploaded and Sprout will confirm: "Upload Successful". 

> ![](images/user-flow-data-upload.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing the steps that occur after validation and final data upload from a Data Contributor.](images/user-flow-data-upload.png)
```

## Entire User Flow

In the text and diagrams above, we have "chopped" the user flow of Sprout into five pieces and gone through each of them. In the diagram below, you can see the user flow in its entirety.

<!-- TODO: Update full user flow diagram to include all the other diagrams after review -->  

> ![](images/user-flow.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing the full flow from user inputting data into it finally being stored in the database.](images/user-flow.png)
```

In this document, we will mention different user roles. Go to the [Users](users.qmd) for definitions of user roles. 

NOTE: ADD USER ROLES MORE SPECIFICALLY THROUGHOUT THIS.

::: {.callout-important}
Things we need to define/get clearer on: 

- Schema vs table definitions
  - @K-Beicher: When we have talked about schemas, did you mean a "schema" in the sense of a "create table" script for **one** table or in the sense of a schema able to contain multiple tables, as defined below?
  - In the way we use schema is that short for *database schema*, which would be the "“blueprint” of a database which describes how the data may relate to other tables or other data models. However, the schema does not actually contain data. A sample of data from a database at a single moment in time is known as a database instance."? [source: IBM](https://www.ibm.com/topics/database-schema#:~:text=A%20database%20schema%20is%20considered,known%20as%20a%20database%20instance.)
- Data vs file upload? Is it only a file or also multiple files at a time? 
- What the text should be on the buttons (currently, the user clicks "Save and Submit Schema" many times)
- ... other things?

> :::

Author: Duly noted. I'll remove it here and add it to the PR

## Schema Creation 

When data has been collected, the first step of uploading the data to Sprout is to create a *schema* for the data.

A **schema** in [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) is a named collection of tables, views, sequences, and/or indices. The schemas in Sprout will (mostly?) contain tables.

A schema will include:

- table names, 
- column names (*headers*), 
- descriptions (a sentence describe what the column contains), 
- data types, 
- whether the columns can contain NULL values, and 
- an optional reader-friendly title. 

Together, we call these the *schema definitions*, or simply *definitions*.

> |schema |table | column-name | description | data-type | is-nullable | title (optional)

Reviewer: I changed this table to use more descriptive names, `snake_case` for variables, and backticks for formatting.

Author: Alrighty! So our naming convention is kebab-case for file names and snake_case for variables?

In a future version of Sprout, the user will have the option to save a draft of the schema and return to it later, but for the initial version, the only option will be for the user to click "Save and Submit Schema". 

At this user interface, missing fields will initially be highlighted in blue so the user's attention is led to these missing fields. The user will only be able to continue, if no fields have missing values. If a user clicks "Save and Submit Schema" without having filled in all fields, the missing fields will be highlighted in red. 

![](images/user-flow-2-schema-validation-completeness.png)

### User Confirmation: Schema Correctness

Then, when the validation is successful, Sprout will show the user the final schema for confirmation. This works as a user-driven check for *corretness*, i.e., is the schema filled in correctly, rather than is the schema complete, as the validation check before this step.

If the user decides that the schema is not correct, they will click "Edit Schema" and they will be shown a user interface with the schema where they can edit the headers, definitions, and add new fields if needed.

> When the user is satisfied with their adaptions, they click "Save and Submit Schema". The schema will then go through the validation check, "Schema Completeness" again and if the validation is successful, Sprout will confirm: "New Schema added Successfully".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the user is satisfied with their adaptions, they click "Save and Submit Schema". The schema will then go through the validation check, "Schema Completeness" again and if the validation is successful, Sprout will confirm: "New Schema Added Successfully".
```

Now, that the schema has been created successfully, the user has two options: Either they can "Continue to Data Upload", if they want to add data to the newly created schema right after the schema has been submitted, or they can choose to quit Sprout at this step, if they only wanted to create the schema as preparation for future uploads.

![](images/user-flow-3-schema-created-continue-to-upload.png)

## Data Upload

There are two entry points for a user to upload data using an existing schema. The first option is to continue from the diagram above, where the user wants to upload data right after they have created a new schema. In this option, they click "Continue to Data Upload" (left path of diagram below).

![](images/user-flow-4-prepare-to-upload-using-existing-schema.png)

The other option is the typical [Data Contributor](users.qmd#data-contributors) route where the user will enter Sprout, click "Upload Data", and then "Use Existing Schema".
Sprout will then show the user a list of existing schemas to choose from and the user will select a schema and select a file to upload. Then, they will click "Continue to Data Upload" (right path in the diagram above). 

> After these steps, Sprout will initialise the data upload. This initialisation includes a validation check, *Schema and Data Match*, as seen in the dragram below. At this step,Sprout checks whether the data and schema matches. If this validation fails, Sprout will show "Validation failed" along side error messages where the system detects that the data does not match the schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After these steps, Sprout will initialise the data upload. This initialisation includes a validation check, *Schema and Data Match*, as seen in the diagram below. At this step, Sprout checks whether the data and schema match. If this validation fails, Sprout will show "Validation Failed" along with error messages where the system detects that the data does not match the schema. 
```

> The aim here is to show the users as meaningful and helpful error messages as possible. These messages should enable the user to go to their raw data and edit them to attempt to fix the errors. This step is, naturally, outside of Sprout (therefore, marked in blue in the diagram below). The user will then click "Upload Edited/New Version of File" (we need a better text for this, any ideas?) and Sprout will show a user interface, where the user can add the new version of the file. When the user have selected the file and clicks "Upload File", the validation check runs again. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aim here is to show the users error messages that are as meaningful and helpful as possible. These messages should enable the user to go to their raw data and edit them to attempt to fix the errors. This step is, naturally, outside of Sprout (therefore, marked in blue in the diagram below). The user will then click "Upload Edited/New Version of File" and Sprout will show a user interface, where the user can add the new version of the file. When the user has selected the file and clicks "Upload File", the validation check runs again. 
```

If the validation fails, the loop with showing errors, user editing file outside of Sprout and uploading it again, will happen again. 

If validation succeeds, the data will be uploaded and Sprout will confirm: "Upload Successful". 

![](images/user-flow-5-data-upload.png)

## Entire User Flow

In the text and diagrams above, we have "chopped" the user flow of Sprout into five pieces and gone through each of them. In the diagram below, you can see the user flow in its entirety. 

> ::: {.callout-important}
> @signekb will update entire user-flow to fit the partial user flow diagrams, when they have been reviewed/are final.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: Update full user flow diagram to include all the other diagrams after review -->
```
